Terms and Conditions:
The following brands are excluded from additional discount, unless otherwise noted: Ambience, Arteriors, Big Ass Fans, Craftmade, Corbett Lighting, Elan, Fanimation, Fredrick Ramond, Generation Lighting, George Kovacs, Hinkley, Hubbardton Forge, Hudson Valley, Hunter, Kichler, Metropolitan, Minka-Aire, Minka Lavery, Mitzi, Schonbek, The Great Outdoors, Troy Lighting and Visual Comfort brands. Closeout items are also excluded and additional brands may be subject to exclusion. Promo codes cannot be combined with any other offer.
The materials contained in this site are protected by trademark laws of the United States of America, including, but not limited to the Lanham Act. Contents of this site may not be reproduced in any manner whatsoever either in whole or in part without written permission of the copyright owner, authorized agents or representatives. Federal law provides severe civil and criminal penalties for the unauthorized reproduction, distribution, or exhibition of trademarked materials. (Lanham Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 1051–1127)).
Progressive Lighting’s logo is a registered trademark and may not be used without the express written permission of Progressive Lighting, Inc. All products and images contained herein are Trademark Progressive Lighting and may not be used without their expressed permission.
The views and advertisements expressed in these submissions are those of Progressive Lighting. Progressive Lighting makes no warranties nor any implied warranties for any materials, services or information from the content of this site and/or any site that may be linked with Progressive Lighting Note: Such limitations or warranties may not apply in certain jurisdictions. Progressive Lighting does not authorize any business that may occur outside the laws the United States or any foreign country.
Any materials or submissions via any form, from mail to electronic transmissions, submitted to Progressive Lighting become the property of Progressive Lighting, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing, to be used for any purpose without any compensation to the provider of that information.
Progressive Lighting is not responsible for the unauthorized download of information from this site or for the uses of any product or information provided by other parties. Without written consent of Progressive Lighting, the material in this web site may be downloaded for personal use only. Progressive Lighting is not responsible for any errors and/or omissions in the Web Site materials, products and/or pricing.


Product Content and Order Policy:
We do our very best to ensure we have up-to-date inventory, pricing, and product information posted for all of our 100,000+ products! Product content is constantly updated throughout the day. Sometimes, items may have incorrect data, such as availability, pricing, or product descriptions. If a product has incorrect information due to an error, we will notify you accordingly. We hold the right to refuse or cancel any orders based on incorrect data.
If your credit card payment is pending, we will void the transaction and send you a notification as receipt. These charges will simply drop off your account, rather than show as a separate charge and refund. If your PayPal account or credit card has already been charged for the purchase and then your order is cancelled, we shall immediately issue a credit in the form of a full refund. You will also receive receipt of the transaction refund details.


Return Policy:
We always hope our fixtures and home décor pieces make a beautiful addition to your home, but if for any reason your purchase isn’t the ideal fit, we make it as easy as possible to return it!
For showroom orders, please contact the location you purchased from for assistance with returns.
For online orders, we are proud to offer Hassle-Free Returns, meaning that we arrange return shipping methods on your behalf for approved returns.
To qualify for a return, the product must be in Like New condition and your request should be made within our 30-day grace period after delivery. Like New condition means your product has never been installed, is in its original packaging (including all parts, hardware and assembly instructions) and is free of defect or damage.
All returns are subject to a restocking charge equal to 20%.
If your product shipped via freight truck and requires a Bill of Lading for return, then you will be responsible for the return shipping fees. As part of our Hassle-Free Return Policy, we will always arrange return on your behalf and we will provide a quote for the return shipping costs to you up front. By arranging pick-up with the truck carrier, you agree for the quoted return LTL charges to be deducted from your credit.
If you realize after more than 30 days that your product isn't the perfect fit for your home, and it meets the Like New return eligibility conditions mentioned above, please contact us! We created an Extended Return window as part of our Store Credit Program, allowing us to accept most products for return even after 30 days. Please note that eligibility is determined on a request-by-request basis, so contact us to see if this is available for your order!
Once your product is returned to our facility, it will undergo inspection by our warehouse returns expert to confirm that the correct item has been returned and that it is in Like New condition. Once inspected and approved, our Returns Department will issue your credit. In most cases, credit is issued 1 business day after the return arrives at our facility, though please allow an additional couple of days for processing during high-volume times such as the holiday season. Once you see your credit memo in your inbox, the refunding of your account depends on your banking institution.
If your credit card or PayPal account is refunded, you will receive a transaction ID with your receipt. Customers have reported funds in their account within 3-5 days. If you are issued Store Credit, you will receive a notice about your balance, which is available for immediate use.
While we are thrilled to pass along volume and close out savings to our customers, please understand we cannot accept returns for clearance items, closeout items, custom made items, or unauthorized returns. If items are returned or refused at delivery without prior authorization and/or do not adhere to our “Like New” conditions as defined above, your refund may be subject to handling or non-compliance fees and/or may be issued as store credit.


User Submissions:
We love to see your photos! Progressive Lighting invites you to post, share and tag your content with the hashtag #ProgressiveLighting and our handle: @Progressive.Lighting on Facebook, @progressivelighting on Instagram, @progressivelighting on TikTok and @ProgLighting on Twitter. 
By uploading, submitting, sending or tagging your content on social media or through ProgressiveLighting.com, you give us permission to reproduce and use your content as follows:
You grant Progressive Lighting permission to use, store, reproduce, modify, publicly display and distribute your content.
Your content may be used for Progressive Lighting’s marketing purposes, including but not limited to, email campaigns, blog posts, social media posts, store materials and other customer communications.
Our license to your content is non-exclusive and royalty free.
You represent and warrant that you own all rights to your content and that the distribution of your content will not violate the intellectual property rights, privacy rights or legal rights of any third party.
Progressive Lighting does not claim ownership of user-generated content or endorse any opinions expressed in the materials submitted by any other users. Progressive Lighting has the right to remove user content at any time, for any reason and without notice.


Mobile Terms of Service:
The Progressive Lighting mobile message service (the "Service") is operated by Progressive Lighting (“Progressive Lighting”, “we”, or “us”). Your use of the Service constitutes your agreement to these terms and conditions (“Mobile Terms”). We may modify or cancel the Service or any of its features without notice. To the extent permitted by applicable law, we may also modify these Mobile Terms at any time and your continued use of the Service following the effective date of any such changes shall constitute your acceptance of such changes.
By consenting to Progressive Lighting’s SMS/text messaging service, you agree to receive recurring SMS/text messages from and on behalf of Progressive Lighting through your wireless provider to the mobile number you provided, even if your mobile number is registered on any state or federal Do Not Call list. Text messages may be sent using an automatic telephone dialing system or other technology. Service-related messages may include updates, alerts, and information (e.g., order updates, account alerts, etc.). Promotional messages may include promotions, specials, and other marketing offers (e.g., cart reminders).
You understand that you do not have to sign up for this program in order to make any purchases, and your consent is not a condition of any purchase with Progressive Lighting. Your participation in this program is completely voluntary.
We do not charge for the Service, but you are responsible for all charges and fees associated with text messaging imposed by your wireless provider. Message frequency varies. Message and data rates may apply. Check your mobile plan and contact your wireless provider for details. You are solely responsible for all charges related to SMS/text messages, including charges from your wireless provider.
You may opt-out of the Service at any time. Text the single keyword command STOP to +18334521229 or click the unsubscribe link (where available) in any text message to cancel. You'll receive a one-time opt-out confirmation text message. No further messages will be sent to your mobile device, unless initiated by you. If you have subscribed to other Progressive Lighting mobile message programs and wish to cancel, except where applicable law requires otherwise, you will need to opt out separately from those programs by following the instructions provided in their respective mobile terms.
For Service support or assistance, text HELP to +18334521229 or email customerservice@lightsonline.com.
We may change any short code or telephone number we use to operate the Service at any time and will notify you of these changes. You acknowledge that any messages, including any STOP or HELP requests, you send to a short code or telephone number we have changed may not be received and we will not be responsible for honoring requests made in such messages.
The wireless carriers supported by the Service are not liable for delayed or undelivered messages. You agree to provide us with a valid mobile number. If you get a new mobile number, you will need to sign up for the program with your new number.
To the extent permitted by applicable law, you agree that we will not be liable for failed, delayed, or misdirected delivery of any information sent through the Service, any errors in such information, and/or any action you may or may not take in reliance on the information or Service.
We respect your right to privacy. To see how we collect and use your personal information, please see our Privacy Notice below.


Privacy Policy
Progressive Lighting values your trust and we take your privacy seriously. This privacy policy describes the privacy practices of ProgressiveLighting.com. This policy, along with the Terms and Conditions, governs our collection and use of information, and your choices about this use.

Our Commitment to You:
Progressive Lighting never shares personally identifiable information about our customers with third parties for their direct marketing use. We send commercial emails only to customers who have asked to receive them.

Information we collect:
Information you provide:
We collect personally identifiable data (such as name, address, telephone number, email address, device location, transaction information, and payment card information) directly from you when you provide in connection with a transaction or request for information, such as making a purchase through our website, requesting a catalog or signing up to receive emails from us.

Information that is collected automatically
When you visit our website, we will also collect information automatically regarding your use of the website, including the IP address for the computer you are using, device ID, and the pages you visit without our website.

We may combine the information you provide and the information we collect during your visit to our website with data collected from third parties, including publicly available data, in order to better personalize your experience and to optimize the performance of our website.

Cookies and other technology
This page utilizes cookies, which are small data files stored by your web browser on your computer. Cookies enable us to enhance and personalize your online experience, and permit us to remember you when you return to our website, to deliver personalized marketing, and to better understand the way you use our website. Cookies also help keep track of items you put into your shopping cart, including when you have abandoned your cart, and this information is used to determine when to send cart reminder messages via email or SMS.

In addition to cookies, this site uses display advertising and remarketing with Google Analytics to advertise online. Third-party vendors, including Google, show our ads on sites across the Internet. This site and third-party vendors, including Google, use first-party cookies (such as the Google Analytics cookie) and third-party cookies (such as the DoubleClick cookie) together to inform, optimize and serve ads based on visitor’s past visits to this website. Visitors can opt out of Google Analytics for Display Advertising and customize Google Display Network ads using the Ads Preferences Manager.

You may delete or disable cookies using the settings on your internet browser. However, some features of our website require cookies, including registration for an online account at ProgressiveLighting.com.

How we use the data we collect
We use the data we collect from you for the following purposes:

To complete a transaction with you at your request, such as processing payment for a purchase, or shipping merchandise you have purchased.
To provide you with information you have requested, including product information and marketing emails
To personalize your experience on our website and our communications with you
To provide you with relevant and personalized marketing, including personalized offers
To measure and understand the way you use our website
To improve our website and marketing efforts
How data may be shared
We contract with others to provide certain services, including web hosting, advertising, email distribution, market research, analytics, shipping, payment processing, and fraud prevention and detection services. These companies are prohibited by contract from using personally identifiable information received in connection with their provision of these services for their own marketing purposes.

We do not rent or sell your information to others for their marketing purposes.

We may also contract with third party advertising companies to serve ads on our behalf across the Internet. These advertising companies will use cookies or pixel tags to collect anonymous information about your visits to our website and your interactions with products and services, and may use this information and information about your visits to other websites to target advertisements. These targeted advertisements may appear on other sites that you visit. While ProgressiveLighting.com is not designed to recognize a web browser’s “do not track” setting, you may opt-out of receiving this kind of behavioral advertising by clicking here or here.

We reserve the right to share information we have collected under this policy with corporate affiliates; in connection with a sale or purchase of business assets; where necessary to protect our rights or the rights of others; or as required by law.

Your Choices
If you would like to correct information you have provided to us, including updating your address or telephone number, please contact us.

As described in the section on cookies, you may opt out of receiving personalized behavioral advertising, including retargeting, by clicking here or here.

If you place an order online, we may send you transactional emails relating to your order using the email address you provide at the time of the order. If you have signed up to receive promotional emails from us, we may also send you emails with marketing messages. To unsubscribe from marketing emails, you can contact us or click on the link included in every commercial email message.

Children
The safety of children is, of course, very important to us. Children should always ask a parent or guardian for permission before sending personal information to anyone online. Progressive Lighting, Inc. does not knowingly collect or maintain information at our website from those who are under 18.

Changes to this Privacy Policy
We may update this policy in the future. Please check back for changes to this policy.

Contact Us:
To help us improve our privacy policy and practice, please give us your feedback. You can call us to: 1-855-408-1876. Or you may email us or write to us at:

Progressive Lighting
3130 North Berkeley Lake Road NW
Duluth, Georgia 30096